2022-06-15 Keycloak configuration will be managed by Terraform to support automation (#14)
department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-platform-architecture: rfc/2022/2022-06-15 - Keycloak configuration managed by Terraform.md

    "key2" = "value2"
  }
}
```

Example of creating user permissions in Keycloak (permissions.tf):
```hcl
resource "keycloak_users_permissions" "users_permissions" {
  realm_id = keycloak_realm.realm.id

  view_scope {
    policies          = [
      keycloak_openid_client_user_policy.test.id
    ]
    description       = "description"
    decision_strategy = "UNANIMOUS"
  }

  manage_scope {
    policies          = [
      keycloak_openid_client_user_policy.test.id
    ]
    description       = "description"
    decision_strategy = "UNANIMOUS"
  }

  map_roles_scope {
    policies          = [
      keycloak_openid_client_user_policy.test.id
    ]
    description       = "description"
    decision_strategy = "UNANIMOUS"
  }
}
```
## Risks
A risk of using terraform is if the developer misconfigures terraform modules which could lead to deploying resources with security vulnerabilities inadvertently. Prevention of misconfiguration must be a significant part of the development. This issue could be avoided if there is constant and increased security scanning of Terraform modules and developers upgraded Terraform’s latest module versions with security patches.

## Alternatives

> Like other tools, there are several other alternatives to terraform implementing infrastructure as code (IaC) with tools like CloudFormation (an AWS service) and Ansible.

Reviewer: What are the benefits and risks of these alternatives? Which would you suggest as the "best" alternative?

Reviewer 2: I think the best alternative is CloudFormation if using AWS cloud for resources. The most significant benefit of CloudFormation is the service integration with AWS cloud services. and the downside is it is not cloud-agnostic.

The benefit of the Ansible is that it is very simple to learn. it's written in python language and the playbooks are written in YAML.

Author: @iriteshp can we try to incorporate this comment & response into the RFC to keep it up-to-date? We also talked about adding using a K8s manifest file to manage config, but I know you're working on adding that in already.

# RFC: Keycloak configuration will be managed by Terraform to support automation 

<!--
The title is what you want comments on. Use the active voice in a future tense.
Example:
    - The website will be built using the XZY framework
-->

* Comment Deadline: `2022-06-15`
* Team Crew and Name: Platform/Access Management Team
* Authors:
  * [Ritesh Patel](https://github.com/iriteshp)
  * [Kevin Duensing](https://github.com/kjduensing)
* [Original RFC Pull Request](https://github.com/department-of-veterans-affairs/va.gov-platform-architecture/pull/14)

## Background

> The Infrastructure as Code (IaC) is managing and provisioning the infrastructure as a code instead of doing it manually. Configurations are created as a code containing specifications of resources, which makes it easier to create, update, manage and distribute the configurations. There are several IaC solutions available currently but we will implement Terraform as IaC to configure Keycloak resources automatically because it is cloud-agnostic and provides a flexible abstraction of resources and providers

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Infrastructure as Code (IaC) is the practice of managing and provisioning infrastructure programmatically instead of doing it manually. Configurations are created as code containing resource specifications, making them easier to create, update, manage and distribute. Several IaC solutions are currently available, but we will implement Terraform as IaC to configure Keycloak resources automatically because it is cloud-agnostic and provides a flexible abstraction of resources and providers.
```

## Motivation

> 1. To make the process of creating/managing Keycloak resources automated so less manual intervention is needed.

Reviewer 4: what does "Keycloak resources" consist of?

Reviewer 2: Keycloak resources consist of entities/objects like realms, users, roles, and permissions within Keycloak. These resources will be managed by Terraform.

2. To maintain user permissions automatically so human errors can be prevented and permissions can be audited in one place.
3. To ensure consistency so resource conflicts can be prevented. Terraform maintains one state so developers can reference the same configurations no matter where they are running from.

## Design
The syntax of Terraform configurations is called HashiCorp Configuration Language (HCL). The HCL config files contain configuration code for the Keycloak provider and resources. The diagram below describes our process for  The below process is a potential solution for automating Terraform to create/modify resources in Keycloak.

> 1. Pull requests in source control trigger automation with appropriate parameters and the parameters are passed to the config files. We will use commands terraform validate and terraform plan to validate configuration files and see the execution plan of the changes.

Reviewer 4: What is the automation being used to apply the Terraform PR?

> 2. We will store state files generated by Terraform terraform.tfstate remotely maintains the state of infrastructure and configuration. 

Reviewer 2: State files are being stored in S3. Terraform files will be in the DevOps repo.

> 3. After validating the execution plan when a pull request is approved, the process will trigger the terraform apply  command to execute proposed actions in the execution plan and apply changes in Keycloak.

Reviewer 4: How is the execution plan being validated?

Reviewer 2: When GitHub action runs terraform plan it also writes plan execution output to PR. so, the AMT team can quickly validate and approve PR.

  realm   = "my-realm"
  enabled = true
}

resource "keycloak_openid_client" "openid_client" {
  realm_id            = keycloak_realm.realm.id
  client_id           = "test-client"

  name                = "test client"
  enabled             = true

  access_type         = "CONFIDENTIAL"
  valid_redirect_uris = [
    "http://localhost:8080/openid-callback"
  ]

  login_theme = "keycloak"

  extra_config = {
    "key1" = "value1"
    "key2" = "value2"
  }
}
```

Example of creating user permissions in Keycloak (permissions.tf):
```hcl
resource "keycloak_users_permissions" "users_permissions" {
  realm_id = keycloak_realm.realm.id

  view_scope {
    policies          = [
      keycloak_openid_client_user_policy.test.id
    ]
    description       = "description"
    decision_strategy = "UNANIMOUS"
  }

  manage_scope {
    policies          = [
      keycloak_openid_client_user_policy.test.id
    ]
    description       = "description"
    decision_strategy = "UNANIMOUS"
  }

  map_roles_scope {
    policies          = [
      keycloak_openid_client_user_policy.test.id
    ]
    description       = "description"
    decision_strategy = "UNANIMOUS"
  }
}
```
## Risks

> A risk of using terraform is if the developer misconfigures terraform modules which could lead to deploying resources with security vulnerabilities inadvertently. Prevention of misconfiguration must be a significant part of the development. This issue could be avoided if there is constant and increased security scanning of Terraform modules and developers upgraded Terraform’s latest module versions with security patches.

Reviewer 4: What is planned to mitigate this risk, what security scanning would be used?

Reviewer 2: There are several security scanners for Terraform in GitHub Actions (like [Terraform security scan](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/terraform-security-scan)). We are yet to research for the best and finalize.
